He was on the shape staff, yeah. And he had orders
for our, for the 302nd Transport Wing to provide
him with airlift to move French political
prisoners back to France as soon as they were
released from the different prison camps in
Germany.
also asked that some member from our command go
with him. Colonel Bateman condescended to let me
go along with him. We went to many a camp, picked
these guys up. The U.S.
Army would overrun the camp and we'd be right in
behind them. Some of them would be home back in
France the very next day. And the
French were appreciative of it to the degree that
that's,
I know it was the reason that I was awarded the
French Quarter Gear with Silver Star for the
action.
I'm sure that Angel... Since he was the lieutenant
colonel at the time, he probably was given the
Prince Carthagare with palm, but the degree of the
Carthagare is usually determined by the rank of
the person receiving it. Tell me about the
conditions in these German prison camps.
Well,
I'm going to kick that thing off
in
a
minute. The best way to describe the condition is
probably try to describe some of the people that we
pulled out of those camps that had long since given
up on life and had long since, definitely long
since given up ever expecting to get back to
France.
I had, subsequent to that time, been through
the...
camps
where they imprisoned all the Jews and disposed of
most of them. I guess
the next degree of
just existing is probably the way the political
prisoners lived because they had no reason to
execute them but they were certainly hoping that
they would die and therefore no longer have to
maintain them and provide for them. The
sanitary conditions were
horrible.
Some of the
camps that we went into,
later years have been used by US Army and US Air
Forces in Germany. It seems that once the property
is taken out of the German It's just handed down
from one agent to another to use. And how do we use
it? Denazification program? After what? How do we
use these? Oh, as either a location for one of our
units or administrative headquarters or
something like
that. So most of the French political prisoners
then were just on the edge of starvation. Right.
I'd say that 90%
to 95% of them are requiring some type of
assistance just to transport themselves, you
know, from one place to another.
Did you go in with doctors to ? The
main thing was to move them out of the country. not
to try to medicate them where we found them, but to
move them to France. And then wherever they were
offloaded in France, they were cared for. But the
main thing was to move them, to get them out of
Germany post-haze and emptied up. Because this
operation was... or at times less than a half a mile
behind the moving front. Not to try to establish
something there, but as soon as they were overrun,
get those poor suckers out of there and get them
home.
A good question might be, who laid this on and was it
all part of the effort And I've never even really
looked at that, because
I'd look at it now and say it's just part of the
Humanitarian Act, and it had very little to do with
prosecuting the war.
And your job was transportation, then? The range
of transportation, the climate? We called back to
our unit to bring So many birds in a certain
location.
And then angels, of course,
to administer to them and find out who within the
organization was their titular head.
There seems to be a, though I've never been one,
I've never been in the, I have talked to many people
that have been in prison when the prison was
overrun or changed hands or something like that.
There seems to be some type of feeling between the
guard and the person being guarded, you know,
that, well, we're leaving and good luck to you and
take off, you know, and not want to have animosity.
I mean, that's all over with now. Hope you live,
maybe, you know. Was there that feeling today? In a
number of places there were, yes. I have a friend
that lives right here that was a prisoner. And the
Germans, when they got ready to leave because the
Russians were coming, the Germans actually
handed over to them arms and ammunition so that the
US forces could keep the Russians down. This type
of thing. Where was he a prisoner? In Eastern
Germany? Yep.
But it had to be in the northern part because that's
where the Russians were coming down.
He was on a bomb crew that
went down. Do you think there was that type of
relationship between the French guards and the
German guards and the French prison? No. No? No.
Not politically. No. They'd still hope to die. Why
didn't they just shoot him? They seemed to shoot
everybody else, didn't they? Well, under
different types of control, I guess. I don't know.
What were your feelings when you got into these
bases
and saw these conditions? I don't really know. I
can't answer that.
Do you... It doesn't take the one or two of them, and
then you become kind of immune to it. The job is to
move them and
help them get out of there.
There's not so much that we can do. Once we're in,
identify that they are the... French political
prisoner and not of their own people or something
like that, call the taxi and get them aboard the
taxi and move to the next one. Did you feed them
first? No way would you feed them. There's
something there. Within the camp? Yeah.
We're just a handful of people. Again,
recognizing them, call the taxi, and send them
home.
And how long did you have this job? Well, this was a
project effort. It's September, isn't it? No, it
was just a project that went on about four to six
weeks, something like that. as fast as the army was
moving we were just right behind for that period of
time and this is in when probably march and april of
1945 that era at that time the war ends in may so is
that right right before the end of the war then
yeah it could have been as early as even in february
Why didn't they, do you know why they didn't have a
French, why didn't they have French officers
doing this? Why did they have American officers?
Because they needed the transportation. Well,
the reason they didn't have an American officer
from our outfit is because, you know, we had the
inter-theater transport. We were set up to do this
type of work, whereas, all respect to the troop
carrier, you know, they're good at loading
parachutists and and pushing people out the door,
you know, in Geronimo and hanging on their cables.
But, you know, we were set up to carry passengers,
to manifest people, to care for them, you know, and
so on. Now, why Angel instead of a French officer? I
don't know, other than the fact that we were behind
the American Army back then. Oh, okay, so you're in
the American sector.
Yeah. Okay, then what happened? Then what was your
next? This is a temporary assignment, so then did
you go back to Paris? Yeah, I just went back. The
fact is, while I was gone, there's a fellow that's
up at College Station now, worked for me,
Jack Jones. I don't know what department he's in up
there, but... He set in for me while I was gone. He
was the headquarters commandant. We had worked
together before. In fact,
as the war simmered down, we put this history of the
302nd Transport Wing together and had it. Oh, did
you? You wrote that? It's nothing but assembly of
stuff.
He was the photographer on the battalion, and he
did all of the photographic work. Oh, it's
horrible writing, but you've got to remember it
was put together over there, and we had it
reproduced and hardbacked and everything
without costing anybody, and everybody got a copy
of it. That's great. Then about that time, things
really began to peter out, and
By that time the war was about over.
Yeah. And were you interested or did you think that
you'd be going to
the Pacific Front? No, I had no idea that I'd go
there because of the time that I'd already spent in
Europe and the
It
even looked like things were beginning to get
pretty good for us in the Pacific, even before they
dropped the two nuke bombs.
The way that people were being relieved from
Europe was based on how many points they had and how
many service and all that business. Of all things,
I had gone over with a 7th Air Depot Group, and I was
reassigned to an air depot group in Belgium to come
home. It was coming through the States, and all I
was going to do is just ride with them and then drop
off from the States. So I went over with an air depot
group, and I came back with an air depot group, and I
did all the work with transport and carrying.
and not to let a guy have a free ride when i got up to
the air depot group the commander called me in and
called me in and he said well you're going to go home
and you're on the list when we get to the states you
drop off and we all take leave and we're going on the
pacific And he said, it looks like you're going to
have to do some work for us. And I said, like what?
And he says, I don't know about that. He says, but
I'm appointing you a train commander to move us
from here to the port.
And I said, thanks a lot, Colonel. And he said,
well, you didn't want to sit around here.
We were right out of Liège, Belgium. He said, you
didn't want to sit around here all this time and do
nothing, did you? I said, no, sir, I want to be the
train commander. He said, all right, you're the
train commander. And so I put together a
three-element move and three train loads, moved
them from where they were in Liège
to Camp Top Hat, I guess it was. All of the... camps
that people were assembled at were named after
cigarettes. Can you imagine that? Top hat. I bet
you didn't even know there was a top hat cigarette.
I don't have any smoke cigarettes, but it was one of
the cigarettes that came about during the war and
it was a cheapie.
Anyway, we moved the air depot group into the camp
top hat. ultimately boarded ship
and came home. And where did you land in America?
Landed at Hampton Roads, Virginia. Was there a
festival for the returning veterans or was there
some kind of parade? No.
We went into the polling camp there in
Virginia. and we were there for about two days they
got us all organized and put
a whole slew of us on a train headed to san antonio
here
fortunately there was a major on there that
outranked me so that made him the train commander
At that time, they were already processing those
of us that had enough points to get out, that wanted
out. And they assigned a code to everybody in the
Air Corps. I don't know about the Army. And once
recommended for regular, recommended for
reserve, Once regular, once reserved. The one was
yes, and the two was no. And this little girl had
already communicated with me and said, if this is
what service is like, well, you better choose. So
my code was 1121, recommended for regular,
recommended for reserved. Didn't want regular,
but did want reserved. So got on back. took leave
after we got to San Antonio, and then I had to go back
to Wright-Patterson and turn in all of the stuff
that by then the Japs had given up. So this Air Depot
group stuff was all at Wright-Patterson. We had to
go back, break it out of crates, and turn it in. And
then
they sent me down to
Ellington
closed and sent me over to Randolph and started
processing me out. And they said, you know, if you
were to stay in the service two more months, you'd
get an automatic promotion to lieutenant
colonel. Well, this was
in the fall of 45. And I had 120 days leave, which
pushed my termination date up to April.
But my plans were to be back in A&M Well, the first of
February, you know, when the second term
started. I said, Colonel, you're very kind. Can
you guarantee me that I will not be on a
court-martial board or a board of inquiry when
it's time to release me? No, no way.
I said, I can't take it then. I'll go ahead and get
out. I gave up. I can't understand. I mean, could
you explain why you decided not to stay on active
duty? Yeah. She said, there's your wife?
Yeah. Did you want to? Or were you ready to get out? I
think I was ready. You were ready to get out? Why?
Were you discouraged with it? Or why did you want
to? I wasn't real sure of what was. There
we built up the biggest, largest fighting force
that the world had ever known. And I could see it
being dumped in a hurry and not real sure that
we were going to have the civilian as well as
political support behind it. But the one thing
that concerned me more than anything was the Air
Corps was still the prodigal son of the Army.
We thought we were our own bosses, but we weren't.
Why didn't you lie down? Why didn't you like that?
Why didn't I like that? Because I had long since
believed that
it could have worked a hell of a lot simpler and more
effective the other way around. That air power
could control where land and sea power had gone
through history and lost its position and was no
longer there. And I still believe
that.
It didn't hurt. I'd say it didn't hurt. Yeah, it
deferred promotion and advancement five or six
years, but, you know, in a whole career, what, five
or six years?
But if you would have stayed in until, if you would
have stayed in, then for just another couple of
months you would have been a lieutenant colonel.
Right. When I did go back on active duty, I would
have gone back to the lieutenant colonel, rather
than . That's the five or six years it would have
saved. At that time, you'd already made up your
mind to come back to A&M and finish your degree.
Looking back, do you think it was a wise choice?
Well, yes, because I did some things in the five or
six years that I would never have done that
ultimately
paid off in that secondary role. If you remember,
first, I wanted to be an officer. Second, I wanted
to be an engineer. I had not really been able to be an
engineer up until that time.
And
I guess if you had to put it on the scale at all, it
would tilt to the plus side a whole lot more than it
would to the minus. We had some
very choice things happen. The guy said, good
news, bad news. Sure, that's through life. But
this,
for instance, this same angel from headquarters,
he returned to Texas A&M. And sure enough, he ended
up being in a position that when I said, say, Marty
and I are going to come back and we're going to be in
school another term and a summer. He says, oh,
we're opening some brand new apartments. And of
course, we're talking now about right after the
war. But those wooden co-op buildings that are
south of Caulfield, those all used to be co-ops
where kids came from different farm communities
and lived together and had a house by there. And
then they made apartments out of them. Four
apartments, two up and two down. Boy, they were
choice, brand new. We were the first ones to go into
the co-op apartment, thanks to Angel. And he said,
you got one of those apartments. I said, how'd I get
it? He said, I put your name down. So that's where we
lived. Again, like I said, I had this eyesight
problem. I certainly couldn't fly, but I had
enough points built up in the service that while I
was finishing my academics, I took a private pilot
course right out there at Eastwood. You just learn
to fly. So I would never have done that. I had to pay
for it if I'd even found the time to do it. So I
satisfied my own curiosity that I now could
legally do something that I had been doing on the
slide because a lot of these guys had let me take off
and land and things like that. But now I can if I want
to. I got my license. The only flight I ever did was
again with guys that would let me take off and land
in the lighter Air Force aircraft.
How had Texas A&M changed? If you hadn't been there
for now five years, and now you're coming back.
Well, I had to change. See, I hit there right at the
wave of all the vets coming back. There were a few
there that turned before me, but when I came in is
when the largest bunch had come in. Now the next,
for summer, there were even more. But everything
was cold. not co-ed, co-cadet, co-vet. Even the,
see, like I said, the editor of the battalion, they
were co-editors. One was a cadet, and I was elected
as the vet editor. And you could see it begin to have
more older people, and people that had, even
though they may be young, had Been off to war for a
couple years and then come in there. Well, just the
maturity alone, they were older. Now, how long
that lasted at A&M, I don't know, because I wasn't
there that long. But I guess until those going to
school on the GI Bill kind of became a strict
minority instead of a heavy minority. I don't
think they ever outnumbered you. Maybe they did. I
don't know. How are the relationships between
the... No problem at all. No problem between the
vets and the court kids? Because, you know, you
have very mature people versus real young, you
know, 17, 18-year-olds. No problem. I don't think
so. It certainly didn't surface itself during the
time that... But I had the battalion, you know, to
the point where we really had to fight things out,
you know, or air them in the newspapers
or things like that. No problem.
So you only had, what, 12 credits to go? How many
credits did you have? 14. I took one whole term, and
because I was in flying, I just stayed on through
the whole summer rather than get out half of the
summer so that I could take the other half of the
flying course. Then we went on home. So you
graduated in August of 1946? Yeah.
Now, at that time, when you graduated, did you
consider, I know you went to work for a civilian
corporation, but did you consider going back into
the Air Force? Not at
that time. So you wanted to work as an engineer. And
you did from 1946 to 1951. That's right. And you
were also a reserve officer. And did you go to
reserve meetings? Not regularly. I went enough to
just keep my status.
So from 1946 to 51, you were the owner-manager of
Southside Construction. Southstate, yeah.
Yeah, Southstate Construction Company.
Did you do this? If you were the owner-manager, was
this your own construction company then? Did you
establish it? Yes. What happened was when I came
out, my dad was engaged in a number of activities.
He was a
plant representative for the Lewis Shepherd
Company, which manufactures material handling
equipment, lift trucks, dollies, conveyor
belts, things like that. And then he decided he
wanted to build some houses and sell them. So I went
to work with him for a few months. Then he decided
that he was going to get out of the business. And I
said, OK, I don't care about the materials
handling, but I'll stay in the building business.
Then I went from the building business, which is
straight speculating markets, and decided to go
into the construction business of bidding on jobs
and doing both commercial and residential work.
and found it to be very interesting. And one of
these 4-H's, Harold Lewis, he and I got together
and decided that we would form a partnership. And
not only form a partnership, but because we had
limited experience that for something like six to
nine months, I would go to work for one of the other
larger construction firms in Houston as a
superintendent running one of the jobs out on the
site. And that he would so-called run our
business, but I would also work the business at
night and on the weekends or whenever I would need
it. Well, that didn't work out. I left the other
firm and went back and took over the business
myself. I was running the business as the sole
owner when Uncle said, hey, come on back. Okay, so
the Korean War erupts in June of 1950. And in 1951,
you were called back in the Air Force? Yeah, I was
called back in the, must have been about, April or
May of 51. And
first question they asked, do you have any
government jobs? No. Do you have any jobs that are
government subsidized or guaranteed? It could
even be a FHA house or a house being built with a VA
loan on it, anything like that. No. How long do you
think it'll take you to close your business? Three
months? Four months? OK, you got it. Let us know if
you need more time. So I had to contact them and say,
I need two more months. So December, I was back in.
Now, it's amazing. So you sold your business, or
what did you do with it? Oh, just closed it up. I had
some properties. that didn't have any buildings
on it. And I went out and went down and inventoried
all the materials we had on hand and went to the
design board and designed a building with the
least amount of cash required using the inventory
and built the building on the property and put some
renters in it and went back in the circuit. How?
Thinking that someday you'd come back out and
start it up. I knew that if I ever went back in, I
wasn't going to come out. Then why didn't you just
sell it? What, the business? Construction
business won't sell.
Unless it's a real big thing. It wasn't heavy
construction of building highways and bridges
and having an awful lot of equipment. It was a
building construction where most of your
equipment is. is owned and carried by the
craftsmen rather than the company. Oh, I had tar
kettles, concrete mixers, trucks. But
at that time, there were too many what I call
graduate carpenters who thought they wanted to be
contractors. And competition's pretty keen.
Now, we've got some things on there in the tape Why
didn't we get out and all this? She actually picked
up the orders and brought them out to my office, my
construction office, where I did the estimating
and what drawing I had to do and where I kept my
inventory and opened those orders. And I said,
well, these are orders calling me back to duty.
What do you think we ought to do? what she said i
think we ought to go back and maybe i'll see more of
you in the service than i have in the construction
business so in that time she had completely
changed her mind absolutely fantastic
so are you happy to go back oh hell yes sure By that
time you were happy. Did it have more to do with just
your personal life or with the war in Korea? No. I
knew I'd never make the war in Korea because that
was already calming down by the time December of 51
came along. In fact, in December they asked me,
they said, you don't have to come if you don't want
to. I said, man, you remember that Confederate
general that the heck of a get you got? I've closed a
business for six months. I've been coming back
into service. And now you tell me I don't have to
come back? I said, you've got me. You know. But, no,
see, by then, Korea was beginning to calm down. It
was diminishing. I'd gotten my My degree, I'd
taken courses at the University of Houston in
design, civil engineer courses that later helped
me towards my master's degree. And I had
accomplished all that really that I wanted to do.
And I knew that I could run a business.
As a major general once said, I don't have two guys
on my staff that have ever made a payroll.
Everybody else had come out of school and gone into
the military, and all they'd seen was that side of
the line. But one other colonel and I, we'd made
payrolls. We'd suffered. We knew what cash flow
was. We knew what contractors were going through.
Again, that's this human side that I spoke of
earlier. The more exposure you can get and the more
different walks of life, the better you are. And
that's what I say. The accounting graduate just
doesn't have it as compared to that guy at A&M that
can get himself in all types of exposure if he wants
to. Well,
we went in, and it took a while to get Again,
engineering and the service, but this time I was
bound and determined. I was not going to be pushed
off in the administrative or personnel side, even
though I was called back as a personnel staff
officer because that's what I was when I went out.
It hadn't changed. That's what I was when I came
back. So we
were sent to Warner Robins, Georgia,
to headquarters of a
numbered air force and administering to the
reserve personnel. And after a few months of
plowing the ground over there and personnel and
then agent general's job,
the local personnel people Well, I called on the
general, the commanding general, which is a
protocol type thing to do. When he found out that I
was an engineer and I'd been in the construction
business, he liked to have a history. He said, boy,
you'd be in my office tomorrow morning. We're
going to get that straightened out. Well, out of
courtesy, I went by because I had friends that were
in the personnel business. I went by and I said,
hey, yeah, we've heard about it, but just relax.
Nothing's going to happen. What do you mean
nothing's going to happen? I'm going in there.
Yeah. Went in and he had changed. Turned out I
outranked his engineer, so he wasn't about to do
anything. So I said, okay, we've got to go around
that one. If the general's not going to move me into
engineering because I outrank his man, then What
are we going to do next? So this headquarters,
since it administered to the reserve personnel,
administered to the ROTC program. And I just went
over and I said, where do you have openings for our
engineer officers in the ROTC program? He says,
Auburn and Texas A&M. I said, only Auburn. I want
the one at Texas A&M. And they said, you'll never
get it. I said, why? They said, they won't let you
go. I said, well, all we can do is try. Well, I put in
an application to go. It was turned down locally,
which meant that it had to go to the next higher
headquarters. And the next headquarters
concurred with the turn down, which meant it had to
go to Washington, to the top headquarters. And
Washington Reversed it. It says the Continental
Air Command and the 14th Air Force will fulfill its
share of assignments to the ROTC program.
Application approved. How? Well, if I go to Texas
A&M to teach civil engineering, Air Force type.
Then it was called Air Installation Zone. Now, why
did it even go up? Why wasn't it just killed right
there on the level? Because any disapproval has to
have a concurrence. Oh, I see. And since it was a
straight concurrence of the disapproval, it was
subject to Air Force review. So all of a sudden,
there I am. And I'm at A&M. A&M in the position to
teach air installation. And guess what? They
changed the curriculum from specialized
curriculum of communications officer,
installations officer, supply officer,
administrative officer, to a generalized
curriculum where everybody was taught the same
thing. So for three years I sat there and taught,
still not teaching engineering, but in a slot
calling for an engineer officer. And that's what
really made the difference. I was in the slot even
though I wasn't teaching engineering. I was in the
slot. The Air Force thought that you were, this is
what the Air Force thought. Yeah. They thought
that you were teaching engineering. Yeah. And
that's how you got into engineering in the Air
Force finally. When I left A&M, I went up to, do you
know where Mineral Wells is? I've heard of it. It's
up out of Fort Worth, west of Fort Worth. And we used
to have an air base up there, but the aviation
engineers were located there at Walters Air Base.
Then the Army later took it over and trained
helicopter pilots there. And I went up to be in the
aviation engineer force, and from there I went on
at the end of the engineers. Now,
the... The assignment there at A&M, of course,
proved quite fruitful because I was able to get my
master's in civil and without incurring any
federal funds to pay for it and without me
incurring an obligation, a service obligation.
Of course, that wouldn't bother me. If the service
sends you to school and you inherit an obligation
to serve so many years. But that didn't bother me.
So you pretty much went on a night school? No. They
didn't have night school at that time. I went maybe
two courses a semester. And then in the summer, a
course, just one or two at a time. Of course, I had
steel design, concrete design, and estimating
that they transferred from the University of
Houston that I had gotten after my bachelor's
degree. I used
to sit there and envy those other troops that were
also going to school, taking education. P.E. and
things like that. A
master's in engineering is just like a bachelor's
in engineering. They don't let up all the hours in
the lab hours that you've got to put in. But I had a
real good boss. He just said, you make all your
classroom hours and your platform hours and be on
time.